drivers: platform_metrics: Provider framework for battery/temperature metrics (#29999)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/libraries/others/platform_metrics.rst

..
   Copyright (c) 2026 Nordic Semiconductor ASA
   SPDX-License-Identifier: LicenseRef-Nordic-5-Clause

.. _platform_metrics:

Platform metrics
################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

> The platform metrics library fetches and stores platform operating-condition data that other subsystems can use to trigger recalibration, reconfiguration, or other adaptive behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Platform metrics library fetches and stores platform operating-condition data that other subsystems can use to trigger recalibration, reconfiguration, or other adaptive behavior.
```

Reviewer: This seems to be missed.

> The platform metrics library fetches and stores platform operating-condition data that other subsystems can use to trigger recalibration, reconfiguration, or other adaptive behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Platform metrics library fetches and stores platform operating-condition data that other subsystems can use to trigger recalibration, reconfiguration, or other adaptive behavior.
```

> One example consumer is a Wi-Fi® driver, which can use battery voltage and die temperature to trigger recalibration of the Wi-Fi radio.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The platform metrics library retrieves and stores platform operating condition data.
Other subsystems can use this data to trigger recalibration, reconfiguration, or other adaptive behavior.

For example, a Wi-Fi® driver can use battery voltage and die temperature data to trigger recalibration of the Wi-Fi radio.
```

The library maintains a periodic snapshot of the following two channels:

* Battery voltage - Supply voltage in millivolts (mV).
* Die temperature - SoC die temperature in centi-degrees Celsius (centi-degC); for example, ``2500`` represents 25.00°C.

> A board-level constant such as a crystal (XO) frequency offset is not modeled as a channel here, since it does not drift at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A board-level constant, such as a crystal (XO) frequency offset, is not modeled as a channel here, since it does not drift at runtime.
```

* ``init()``:

    * Called once during ``SYS_INIT`` at application priority.
    * Brings up any hardware or state needed for sampling.
    * Returns ``0`` on success, or a negative ``errno`` value on failure.
    * On failure, the channel falls back to its default value.

* ``sample(out)``:

    * Fills ``out`` with the latest reading for the channel.
    * Sets ``out->type`` to match the value field used.
    * Sets ``out->status`` to ``PLATFORM_METRICS_STATUS_OK`` when the reading is valid, or ``PLATFORM_METRICS_STATUS_ERROR``/ ``PLATFORM_METRICS_STATUS_UNINITIALISED`` otherwise.
    * Updates ``out->timestamp_ms`` with ``k_uptime_get()`` when appropriate.
    * Returns ``0`` on success, or a negative ``errno`` value on failure.

Die temperature
---------------

Use the following Kconfig options to enable and configure the die temperature monitoring:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PLATFORM_METRICS_DIE_TEMP_MONITOR`
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PLATFORM_METRICS_DIE_TEMP_MONITOR_INTERVAL_MS`

.. note::

>    Live data capture for battery voltage will be added at a later date.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. note::
   Live data capture for battery voltage is currently not supported
```

We usually document the current state.

Default values
==============

> When a channel does not have live monitoring enabled, the snapshot holds a compile-time default value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When live monitoring is not enabled for a channel, the snapshot holds a compile-time default value.
```

If no channels use live updates, no work queue items are created and the default values are held in the snapshot cache.
For the default values, see the following Kconfig options:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PLATFORM_METRICS_BATTERY_VOLTAGE_DEFAULT_VALUE`
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PLATFORM_METRICS_DIE_TEMP_DEFAULT_VALUE`

Providers
=========

A channel's live data comes from a provider consisting of a pair of ``init()`` and ``sample()`` functions registered with :c:macro:`PLATFORM_METRICS_CHANNEL_DEFINE`.
A board registers at most one provider per channel.
Since :c:macro:`PLATFORM_METRICS_CHANNEL_DEFINE` emits a unique symbol for each channel ID, registering two providers for the same channel causes the build to fail with a linker "multiple definition" error rather than silently racing at runtime.
There are two ways to provide a provider:

Devicetree-selected sensor provider
-----------------------------------

For components that already have a Zephyr sensor driver, no custom C code is required.

> The die temperature channel's built-in provider (:file:`temperature_monitor.c`) reads data through the RTIO-based sensor API (``sensor_read()`` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SENSOR_ASYNC_API`) from the device referenced by a devicetree chosen node. This also works with sensor drivers that only implement the RTIO ``submit()`` path and not the legacy ``sensor_sample_fetch()``/``sensor_channel_get()`` API, since Zephyr's sensor subsystem falls back to the legacy API internally for drivers that only implement it, and to the native RTIO path otherwise:

Reviewer: Please see if the following edit is fine.
```suggestion
The die temperature channel's built-in provider (:file:`temperature_monitor.c`) reads data through the RTIO-based sensor API (``sensor_read()`` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SENSOR_ASYNC_API`) from the device referenced by a devicetree chosen node.
This also works with sensor drivers that only implement the RTIO ``submit()`` path and not the legacy ``sensor_sample_fetch()``/``sensor_channel_get()`` API.
Zephyr's sensor subsystem internally falls back to the legacy API for drivers that only implement it, and uses the native RTIO path otherwise.
```

> 

Reviewer: Please see if the following edit is fine.
```suggestion

The sensor is selected through the following devicetree chosen node:

```
